An Introduction, and Why Data

Hello, and welcome to this little blog. If you’re here, most likely you’re looking into my background and programming history. This blog is being written as part of a data science bootcamp with the goal of presenting and preserving my journey into the field.

Later blogs will be more technical in nature, but this one is going to delve into my professional history, how I got to this point, and why I’m in a data science course. 

Why I Loved My Old Career

I worked for over a decade in various sort of education. This started in high school with volunteer work and continued through undergrad at an educational summer camp. From there I wore a lot of hats in the education space. I was a dorm coordinator at a high school dorm for international students, a private tutor for a variety of subjects, department head at a tutoring company, and finally a freelance consultant working on curriculum and development at an ed-tech start up.

I really enjoyed teaching in all these forms. I’ve always had a love of learning myself, and I’ve always been eager (sometimes too eager) to share what I’ve learned with anyone willing to listen. I find it a great intellectual challenge to take a metaphorical block of knowledge that I know, find a person with a hole in their knowledge, and to figure out how to fit that block into that hole. Education offers great success stories. I’ve had students run into me on the street and thank me for getting them into their dream schools and it is honestly the best feeling I’ve ever had professionally. In that way the job was also fulfilling to me aside from the monetary angle. I’ll never feel bad or ethically conflicted about helping someone learn.

Education also offered me a lot of intellectual stimulation. As I moved from dorm management to tutoring to department head to curriculum design I wore a lot of hats. I was more or less constantly testing my old skills and honing new skills.

So Why Leave? 

I decided to make a career change for a number of reasons. Some of them are fairly mundane or logistical, independent contract work was fun but not stable enough for me to feel comfortable planning a future, for instance. When I was making my plans the vaccines for Covid were still in development, which steered me away from classroom work.

I’d also found some problems with my previous career. I always felt that, on a micro level, I was helping my students. On a macro level, it was harder to say that I was making big changes. Sometimes I was okay with that, other times it was harder. 

The Varsity Blues college admissions scandal a few years back put a big dent in my enthusiasm for one on one tutoring. I know that there was a pretty good overlap between the demographic I was helping at the time and the demographic that was bribing their way into schools. Partly I know this because I found a few former clients in the indictments list. 

So that was disheartening for two reasons. One, it brought home some of the inherent inequities in educational outcomes, and reminded me that, as a private tutor, I was contributing to that problem. Doing so legally, maybe, but still part of that fuzzy zone that I wasn’t happy being in. Compounding that was a second issue. I could, before that, always say that well, maybe I wasn’t always help everyone who needed the help, maybe I was only helping those that could afford the extra tutoring, but I was helping students. I was working in an area where the school districts had to hire people to watch the train tracks 24/7 so that students under extreme pressure didn’t throw themselves in front of trains. Whatever other privileges these students had, I could help save lives by reducing test anxiety. But then what was the point of helping a student succeed on this test if other people are just going to buy their way past these benchmarks? What was the point of volunteering at a nonprofit across the road if the mask was totally coming off the facade of meritocratic admissions? 

Basically, the system seemed so broken that I wasn’t sure I could feel good working within the confines of that system.

Why Data Science?

I still liked teaching and still liked educating, and I moved my career towards curriculum development. I ended up contracting with an ed-tech company for a while, whose goal was partially to democratize the tutoring experience. That’s a hard nut to crack, but there’s a lot of potential in that space. 
